docs: sql unnest and cleanup unnest datasource (#13736)
apache/druid: docs/querying/sql.md

[ WITH tableName [ ( column1, column2, ... ) ] AS ( query ) ]
SELECT [ ALL | DISTINCT ] { * | exprs }
FROM { <table> | (<subquery>) | <o1> [ INNER | LEFT ] JOIN <o2> ON condition }

> [, UNNEST(<input>) as unnested(<output>) ]

Reviewer: UNNEST(<input>) as <table_alias>(<output>)

For more information about table, lookup, query, and join datasources, refer to the [Datasources](datasource.md)
documentation.

## UNNEST

> The UNNEST clause unnests values stored in arrays within a column. It's the SQL equivalent to the [unnest datasource](./datasource.md#unnest).

Reviewer 2: unnest isn't limited to working on arrays in a column (we don't currently have any array typed columns). `MV_TO_ARRAY` effectively allows casting a multi-value string to an `ARRAY<STRING>`, but arrays could also come from other virtual columns, such as anything using the `ARRAY` constructor or anything that can build arrays, such as `ARRAY_AGG`

The following is the general syntax for UNNEST, specifically a query that returns the column that gets unnested:

```sql

> SELECT target_column FROM datasource, UNNEST(source) as UNNESTED(target_column)

Reviewer: The same query can be invoked as
```
SELECT foo.target_column FROM datasource, UNNEST(source) as foo(target_column)
```
The unnested is not a mandatory keyword and user can use any name they want as a table alias for the unnest. Think of this as unnest is a cross join between two data sources and each can be aliased as a table name.

> SELECT target_column FROM datasource, UNNEST(source_expression) AS table_alias_name(column_alias_name)

Reviewer 3: Does `target_column` need to be `column_alias_name`? I.e., should the column names match in the SELECT and after the AS?

```

* The `datasource` for UNNEST can be any Druid datasource, such as the following:
  * A table, such as  `FROM a_table`
  * A subset of a table based on a query, such as `FROM (SELECT columnA,columnB,columnC from a_table)`, a filter, or a JOIN.
  * An inline array, which is treated as the `datasource` and the `source`, such as `FROM UNNEST(ARRAY[1,2,3])`
* The `source_expression` for the UNNEST function must be an array and can come from any expression. If the dimension you are unnesting is a multi-value dimension, you have to specify `MV_TO_ARRAY(dimension)` to convert it to an implicit ARRAY<> type. You can also specify any expression that has an SQL array datatype. For example, use `ARRAY[dim1,dim2]` if you want to make an array out of 2 dimensions or `ARRAY_CONCAT(dim1,dim2)` if you have to concatenate two multi-value dimensions. 

> * The `AS table_alias_name(column_alias_name)` clause  is not required but is highly recommended. Use it to specify the output, which can be an existing column or a new one. If you don't provide this, Druid uses an nondescriptive name, such as `EXPR$0`.

Reviewer 3: Maybe clarify that these are placeholders, and that you don't have to literally include this `AS` statement as is. For example, something like the following:

Replace `table_alias_name` and `column_alias_name` with your choice of table and column name. To return only the unnested column, call `SELECT column_alias_name` or `SELECT table_alias_name.column_alias_name`.

For more information about table, lookup, query, and join datasources, refer to the [Datasources](datasource.md)
documentation.

## UNNEST

The UNNEST clause unnests array values. It's the SQL equivalent to the [unnest datasource](./datasource.md#unnest). The source for UNNEST can be an array or an input that's been transformed into an array, such as with helper functions like MV_TO_ARRAY or ARRAY.

The following is the general syntax for UNNEST, specifically a query that returns the column that gets unnested:

```sql
SELECT column_alias_name FROM datasource, UNNEST(source_expression) AS table_alias_name(column_alias_name)
```

* The `datasource` for UNNEST can be any Druid datasource, such as the following:
  * A table, such as  `FROM a_table`.
  * A subset of a table based on a query, a filter, or a JOIN. For example, `FROM (SELECT columnA,columnB,columnC from a_table)`.

>   * An inline array, which is treated as the `datasource` and the `source_expression`, such as `FROM UNNEST(ARRAY[1,2,3])`.

Reviewer: If we want to unnest a constant inline expression like [1,2,3] we do not need the datasource. The query comes up as `select * FROM UNNEST(ARRAY[1,2,3])`. We need to make the distinction that Unnest can be used independently if you are operating on an explicit inline data source

* The `source_expression` for the UNNEST function must be an array and can come from any expression. If the dimension you are unnesting is a multi-value dimension, you have to specify `MV_TO_ARRAY(dimension)` to convert it to an implicit ARRAY type. You can also specify any expression that has an SQL array datatype. For example, you cancall UNNEST on the following:
  * `ARRAY[dim1,dim2]` if you want to make an array out of two dimensions. 
  * `ARRAY_CONCAT(dim1,dim2)` if you have to concatenate two multi-value dimensions. 
* The `AS table_alias_name(column_alias_name)` clause  is not required but is highly recommended. Use it to specify the output, which can be an existing column or a new one. Replace `table_alias_name` and `column_alias_name` with a table and column name you want to alias the unnested results to. If you don't provide this, Druid uses a nondescriptive name, such as `EXPR$0`.

> Notice the comma between the datasource and the UNNEST function. This is needed in most cases of the UNNEST function. Specifically, it is not needed when you're unnesting an inline array since the array itself is the datasource.

Reviewer: This is correct the same should be reflected in the syntax correctly

For more information about table, lookup, query, and join datasources, refer to the [Datasources](datasource.md)
documentation.

## UNNEST

> > The UNNEST SQL function is [experimental](../development/experimental.md). Their API and behavior are subject

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
> The UNNEST SQL function is [experimental](../development/experimental.md). Its API and behavior are subject
```

The following is the general syntax for UNNEST, specifically a query that returns the column that gets unnested:

```sql
SELECT column_alias_name FROM datasource, UNNEST(source_expression1) AS table_alias_name1(column_alias_name1), UNNEST(source_expression2) AS table_alias_name2(column_alias_name2), ...
```

* The `datasource` for UNNEST can be any Druid datasource, such as the following:
  * A table, such as  `FROM a_table`.
  * A subset of a table based on a query, a filter, or a JOIN. For example, `FROM (SELECT columnA,columnB,columnC from a_table)`.
* The `source_expression` for the UNNEST function must be an array and can come from any expression. If the dimension you are unnesting is a multi-value dimension, you have to specify `MV_TO_ARRAY(dimension)` to convert it to an implicit ARRAY type. You can also specify any expression that has an SQL array datatype. For example, you can call UNNEST on the following:
  * `ARRAY[dim1,dim2]` if you want to make an array out of two dimensions. 

>   * `ARRAY_CONCAT(dim1,dim2)` if you have to concatenate two multi-value dimensions. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  * `ARRAY_CONCAT(dim1,dim2)` if you want to concatenate two multi-value dimensions. 
```

* The `AS table_alias_name(column_alias_name)` clause  is not required but is highly recommended. Use it to specify the output, which can be an existing column or a new one. Replace `table_alias_name` and `column_alias_name` with a table and column name you want to alias the unnested results to. If you don't provide this, Druid uses a nondescriptive name, such as `EXPR$0`.

> Keep these two things in mind when writing your query:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Keep the following things in mind when writing your query:
```

- You must include the context parameter `"enableUnnest": true`.
- You can unnest multiple source expressions in a single query.
- Notice the comma between the datasource and the UNNEST function. This is needed in most cases of the UNNEST function. Specifically, it is not needed when you're unnesting an inline array since the array itself is the datasource.

> - If you view the native explanation of a SQL UNNEST, you'll notice that Druid uses `j0.unnest` as a virtual column to perform the unnest. An underscore is added for each unnest, so you may notice virtual columns named `_j0.unnest` or `__j0.unnest`.
> 

Author: ```suggestion
- If you view the native explanation of a SQL UNNEST, you'll notice that Druid uses `j0.unnest` as a virtual column to perform the unnest. An underscore is added for each unnest, so you may notice virtual columns named `_j0.unnest` or `__j0.unnest`.
- UNNEST preserves the ordering of the source array that is being unnested

```

For examples, see the [Unnest arrays tutorial](../tutorials/tutorial-unnest-arrays.md).

The UNNEST function has the following limitations:

- The function does not remove any duplicates or nulls in an array. Nulls will be treated as any other value in an array. If there are multiple nulls within the array, a record corresponding to each of the nulls gets created.
- Arrays inside complex JSON types are not supported.
- You cannot perform an UNNEST at ingestion time, including SQL-based ingestion using the MSQ task engine.

> - UNNEST preserves the ordering in the source array that is being unnested.

Author: ```suggestion
```

> - UNNEST preserves the ordering in the source array that is being unnested.

Reviewer 3: Is this a limitation or rather just a description of how UNNEST functions?
